--- lab09-definitions.pdf ---
 
 
GENOME DEFINITIONS* 
Used for Codon Bias Assignment.  
* Short definition of terms. Please note that all of these have a lot more nuanced detail 
about them.  
 
Nucleotide: Building blocks of DNA molecules. For DNA, there are 4: A, T, 
C, and G. 
Codon: A group of 3 nucleotides. Together, those 3 letters code for a 
specific amino acid. 
Amino Acid: A building block of a protein and is usually represented as a 
single letter. An amino acid can be created via several different codons. A 
protein is represented as a string of amino acids. 
Codon Mapping: *See the chart on the next page for a graphic of the 64 
codons and how those map to the 20 amino acids. 
Protein: A functional, 3D structure made by linking together a long chain of 
amino acids. 
Genome: The entire DNA sequence of an organism. 
Replicase (Region): A large section of the viral genome that codes for the 
"machinery" that the virus needs to copy itself. 
Spike Protein (Region): The part of the viral genome that codes for the 
"spikes" on the outside of the virus. This protein is what the human immune 
system sees.  
Synonymous Codons: Two or more different codons that code for the 
exact same amino acid. For example, GCT, GCC, GCA, and GCG are all 
"synonyms" because they all result in Alanine. 
 
 
2 
Codon Bias: As an amino acid can be created via multiple different codons, 
this is the analysis to determine which of the codons an organism seems to 
use more frequently in their DNA structure to create a specific amino acid. 
RSCU (Relative Synonymous Codon Usage) A standardized 
mathematical score used to measure codon bias. 
• 1.0 means the codon is used exactly as often as expected (no bias). 
• Greater than 1.0 means the codon is "Preferred." 
• Less than 1.0 means the codon is "Avoided." 
 
Codon to Amino Acid Mapping: 
 



--- rscu-project-plan.pdf ---
LAB 9 PROJECT PLAN HELP (IF NEEDED) 
NOTES 
A. Be sure to test as you go along! Just try printing what you have to the screen or 
something to make sure that your section actually has the data you are expecting. 
Do not wait to try to run it until all of the pieces are there! 
 
B. I'd strongly suggest writing this program for H1N1 first, since you have all of my 
FASTA files and example output. Then when that works, just change the filenames 
to be the covid ones. 
 
 
Here are tasks that need to be done that have dependencies, and tasks that can be 
done concurrently. 
 
CONCURRENT 1 
 
The CodonEntry ArrayList has to be built first from the codons.csv file. No one can get any 
real work done without that. 
 
A. You'll need the CodonEntry class built. The suggested attributes are in the 
requirements document.  
 
B. In Main, write a method to read in the codons.csv file and split it. Every line in the 
file is one codon, so make an instance of a CodonEntry class, fill it with the data, 
and then add it to an ArrayList of CodonEntries. 
 
C. Write a method to parse the two fasta files. Remember those are just a long string of 
characters. You'll need to create the logic to move through the sequence string 3 
characters at a time (which represents a codon), find the corresponding 
CodonEntry in your list, and increment the count for that region (Replicase or Spike) 
(or h1n1-pb1 and h1n1-ha if you're writing against H1N1 first. pb1 is the replicase of 
flu and ha is the spike equivalent(ish)) 
 
a. There are several ways you could tackle this. You could read the file in its 
entirety, breaking out all of the codons and close the file. Then you'd use the 
list of codons – loop through them all and update your counts. For example, 
if the first codon you read was AAT, find AAT in your list of CodonEntry and 
increment its count 
b. Or, you could read a codon, find it in the list, update the count, and then read 
the next codon. 
 
 
With those necessities out of the way (items everyone will need), you can start 
working on the bigger functionality. 
 
 
SERIAL WORK (DONE IN ORDER) 
A. Math Logic: Calculate the total count for each Amino Acid family, then apply the 
RSCU formula 
𝑅𝑆𝐶𝑈 =  𝑂
𝐸 
to each codon. Everyone should read/use the RSCU_formula.pdf for information on 
this calculation. Remember, you also have my output files from H1N1 to see what 
the numbers look  like. 
B. Those RSCU values need to be updated in your ArrayList<CodonEntry> for each 
codon 
CONCURRENT 2  
 
A. Someone generate the replicase_rscu.csv and spike_rscu.csv files. If you can get 
the first one to work, the second one is nearly identical. 
 
B. Someone start writing the logic for the creation of the rscu_comparison.csv. Get the 
first five columns working from the lab requirements. 
 
C. Someone:  
A. write a method logic to calculate the RSCU differences between the replicase 
and spike RSCU values for each CodonEntry 
B. create a method that determines the correct category (highly favored – highly 
unfavored) when given an RSCU value 
 
SERIAL WORK (DONE IN ORDER) 
A. With B and C complete above, write the logic in Main to combine them. Add the 
RSCU difference and the favored categorization for replicase and spike to the csv. 
 
CONCURRENT 3 
A. Once complete, write the logic to determine whether the last report column should 
be UP, DOWN, or left blank and add that to your csv. 
B. Start working on the final report (spike_favored.txt) format. You should be able to 
get at least the layout looking good, even if you don't yet know the ones that will 
print for UP or DOWN yet. 
 
LAST PARTS 
 
Now that you have a complete rscu_comparison.csv file, use it to determine which 
columns have UP or DOWN and complete your spike_favored.txt report 
 
NOTE: If you've taken my advice to write this project against H1N1 first, double check that 
all of your reports look like mine. If they do, update your project to now use the covid 
replicase and spike files instead. 
 
Zip up all of your code, csv files, and report. Upload the zip to Canvas. Only one member of 
your team needs to submit. Don't forget to then do Part B of the lab. 
 
 
I hope this helps! It's not every detail of course, but it might help you break out the 
work to be done. 


